Restructures kNN documentation into a clearer page hierarchy (#7138)
elastic/docs-content: solutions/search/vector/knn/optimize-performance-accuracy.md

---
navigation_title: Optimize performance and accuracy
description: Tune approximate kNN search in Elasticsearch for speed, recall, vector storage, quantization, and rescoring trade-offs.
applies_to:
  stack:
  serverless:
---

> # Optimize performance and accuracy [optimize-knn-performance-accuracy]

Reviewer: Unless you've been advised to prune this title for SEO reasons, I'd be inclined to add context:
```suggestion
# Optimize approximate kNN search performance and accuracy [optimize-knn-performance-accuracy]
```

Approximate kNN search balances query speed, result quality, and resource use, and small configuration changes can have a large impact on latency, recall, and storage costs in production.

This page covers trade-offs among search speed, recall, indexing cost, vector storage, quantization, and rescoring for approximate kNN search.

## Tune approximate kNN for speed or accuracy [tune-approximate-knn-for-speed-accuracy]

To gather results, the kNN API first finds a `num_candidates` number of approximate neighbors per shard, computes similarity to the query vector, selects the top `k` per shard, and merges them into the global top `k` nearest neighbors.

> For HNSW indices, `num_candidates` is the main search-time speed/accuracy control:

Reviewer: I wasn't sure if this meant "or", "and" or "divided by" at first glance, so I think it should be spelled out:
```suggestion
For HNSW indices, `num_candidates` is the main search-time speed or accuracy control:
```

Reviewer 2: ++ this should read as a tradeoff

* Increase `num_candidates` to improve recall and accuracy (at the cost of higher latency).
* Decrease `num_candidates` for faster queries (with a potential accuracy trade-off).

For DiskBBQ (`bbq_disk`) indices, you can also use `visit_percentage` to control the total percentage of vectors visited during search. `visit_percentage` accepts values from `0` to `100`, including decimal values such as `0.5` (half a percent):

* A good starting value is `3` (3%).
* Increase `visit_percentage` to improve recall and accuracy (at the cost of higher latency).
* Decrease `visit_percentage` for faster queries (with a potential accuracy trade-off).

When a search targets both HNSW and DiskBBQ indices, use `visit_percentage` with `num_candidates` to tune performance and recall across both index types.

> When [quantization](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/dense-vector.md#dense-vector-quantization) is involved, `rescore_vector` is an additional speed/accuracy tuning tool. It reranks a larger candidate set using original vectors after approximate retrieval.

Reviewer: Ditto re "/":
```suggestion
When [quantization](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/dense-vector.md#dense-vector-quantization) is involved, `rescore_vector` is an additional speed or accuracy tuning tool. It reranks a larger candidate set using original vectors after approximate retrieval.
```

* Increase `rescore_vector.oversample` to improve accuracy (at the cost of higher latency).
* Decrease `rescore_vector.oversample` for faster queries (with a potential accuracy trade-off).
* For detailed behavior and usage guidance, see [Oversampling and rescoring for quantized vectors](#dense-vector-knn-search-rescoring).

## Approximate kNN using byte vectors [approximate-knn-using-byte-vectors]

> The approximate kNN search API also supports `byte` (int8) value vectors alongside `float` vectors. Use the [`knn` option]({{es-apis}}operation/operation-search#operation-search-body-application-json-knn) to search a `dense_vector` field with [`element_type`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/dense-vector.md#dense-vector-params) set to `byte` and indexing enabled. Byte vectors reduce memory footprint and can improve cache efficiency for large-scale vector similarity search.

Reviewer: "also" seems unnecessary here:
```suggestion
The approximate kNN search API supports `byte` (int8) value vectors alongside `float` vectors. Use the [`knn` option]({{es-apis}}operation/operation-search#operation-search-body-application-json-knn) to search a `dense_vector` field with [`element_type`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/dense-vector.md#dense-vector-params) set to `byte` and indexing enabled. Byte vectors reduce memory footprint and can improve cache efficiency for large-scale vector similarity search.
```

    PUT byte-image-index
    {
      "mappings": {
        "properties": {
          "byte-image-vector": {
            "type": "dense_vector",
            "element_type": "byte",
            "dims": 2
          },
          "title": {
            "type": "text"
          }
        }
      }
    }
    ```

2. Index your data ensuring all vector values are integers within the range [-128, 127].

    ```console
    POST byte-image-index/_bulk?refresh=true
    { "index": { "_id": "1" } }
    { "byte-image-vector": [5, -20], "title": "moose family" }
    { "index": { "_id": "2" } }
    { "byte-image-vector": [8, -15], "title": "alpine lake" }
    { "index": { "_id": "3" } }
    { "byte-image-vector": [11, 23], "title": "full moon" }
    ```

3. Run the search using the [`knn` option]({{es-apis}}operation/operation-search#operation-search-body-application-json-knn) ensuring the `query_vector` values are integers within the range [-128, 127].

    ```console
    POST byte-image-index/_search
    {
      "knn": {
        "field": "byte-image-vector",
        "query_vector": [-5, 9],
        "k": 10,
        "num_candidates": 100
      },
      "fields": [ "title" ]
    }
    ```

> *Note*: In addition to the standard byte array, one can also provide a hex-encoded string value for the `query_vector` param. As an example, the search request above can also be expressed as follows, which would yield the same results

Reviewer: "you" is better than "one" IMO and "param" seems like an unnecessary abbreviation. "Above" is also one of the words we try to avoid per https://www.elastic.co/docs/contribute-docs/style-guide/accessibility#terms
```suggestion
*Note*: In addition to the standard byte array, you can also provide a hex-encoded string value for the `query_vector` parameter. As an example, the preceding search request can also be expressed as follows, which would yield the same results:
```

```console
POST byte-image-index/_search
{
  "knn": {
    "field": "byte-image-vector",
    "query_vector": "fb09",
    "k": 10,
    "num_candidates": 100
  },
  "fields": [ "title" ]
}
```

## Byte quantized kNN search [knn-search-quantized-example]

If you want to provide `float` vectors but still get the memory savings of `byte` vectors, use the [quantization](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/dense-vector.md#dense-vector-quantization) feature. Quantization allows you to provide `float` vectors, but internally they are indexed as `byte` vectors. Additionally, the original `float` vectors are still retained in the index.

::::{note}
The default index type for `float` vectors is either `bbq_hnsw` or `int8_hnsw`, depending on your product version and vector dimensions. Other element types, such as `byte`, default to plain `hnsw` with no quantization. Refer to [Dense vector field type](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/dense-vector.md).
::::

> You can use the default quantization strategy or specify an index option.

Reviewer: > You can use the default quantization strategy or specify an index option.

Should this be numbered as well? If not, I think the subsequent numbered list needs an introductory sentence.

Author: Yes, I agree this should be a numbered step too. Resolved it.

* `int4` often benefits from rescoring for higher accuracy or recall; 1.5×–2× oversampling usually recovers most loss.
* `bbq` commonly requires rescoring except on very large indices or models specifically designed for quantization; 3×–5× oversampling is generally sufficient, but higher might be needed for low-dimension vectors or embeddings that quantize poorly.

### The `rescore_vector` option [the-rescore_vector-option]
```{applies_to}
stack: preview =9.0, ga 9.1+
```

Use `rescore_vector` to automatically perform reranking. When you specify an `oversample` value, approximate kNN will:

* Retrieve `num_candidates` candidates per shard.
* Rescore the top `k * oversample` candidates per shard using the original vectors.
* Return the top `k` rescored candidates.

Here is an example of using the `rescore_vector` option with the `oversample` parameter:

```console
POST image-index/_search
{
  "knn": {
    "field": "image-vector",
    "query_vector": [-5, 9, -12],
    "k": 10,
    "num_candidates": 100,
    "rescore_vector": {
      "oversample": 2.0
    }
  },
  "fields": [ "title", "file-type" ]
}
```

This example will:

* Search using approximate kNN for the top 100 candidates.

> * Rescore the top 20 candidates (`oversample * k`) per shard using the original, non quantized vectors.

Reviewer: Should this be hyphenated?
```suggestion
* Rescore the top 20 candidates (`oversample * k`) per shard using the original, non-quantized vectors.
```

* Return the top 10 (`k`) rescored candidates.
* Merge the rescored candidates from all shards, and return the top 10 (`k`) results.

### The `on_disk_rescore` option
```{applies_to}
stack: preview 9.3
serverless: unavailable
```

By default, {{es}} reads raw vector data into memory to perform rescoring. This can have an effect on performance if the vector data is too large to all fit in off-heap memory at once. When the `on_disk_rescore: true` index setting is set, {{es}} reads vector data directly from disk during rescoring.

This setting only applies to newly indexed vectors. To apply the option to all vectors in the index, the vectors must be re-indexed or force-merged after changing the setting.

### Additional rescoring techniques [dense-vector-knn-search-rescoring-rescore-additional]

The following sections provide additional ways of rescoring:

#### Use the `rescore` section for top-level kNN search [dense-vector-knn-search-rescoring-rescore-section]

> You can use this option when you don’t want to rescore on each shard, but on the top results from all shards.

Reviewer: Maybe clearer like this?:
```suggestion
You can use this option when you want to rescore on the top results from all shards rather than on each shard.
```

#### Use a `script_score` query to rescore per shard [dense-vector-knn-search-rescoring-script-score]

You can use this option when you want to rescore on each shard and want more fine-grained control on the rescoring than the `rescore_vector` option provides.

Use rescore per shard with the [knn query](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/query-dsl-knn-query.md) and [script_score query ](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/query-dsl-script-score-query.md). Generally, this means that there will be more rescoring per shard, but this can increase overall recall at the cost of compute.

```console
POST /my-index/_search
{
  "size": 10, <1>
  "query": {
    "script_score": {
      "query": {
        "knn": { <2>
          "query_vector": [0.04283529, 0.85670587, -0.51402352, 0],
          "field": "my_int4_vector",
          "num_candidates": 20 <3>
        }
      },
      "script": {
        "source": "(dotProduct(params.queryVector, 'my_int4_vector') + 1.0)", <4>
        "params": {
          "queryVector": [0.04283529, 0.85670587, -0.51402352, 0]
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

1. The number of results to return

> 2. The `knn` query to perform the initial search, this is executed per-shard

Reviewer: One of the words we try to avoid per https://www.elastic.co/docs/contribute-docs/style-guide/word-choice
```suggestion
2. The `knn` query to perform the initial search, this is run per-shard
```

---
navigation_title: Optimize performance and accuracy
description: Tune approximate kNN search in Elasticsearch for speed, recall, vector storage, quantization, and rescoring trade-offs.
applies_to:
  stack:
  serverless:
---

# Optimize performance and accuracy [optimize-knn-performance-accuracy]

Approximate kNN search balances query speed, result quality, and resource use, and small configuration changes can have a large impact on latency, recall, and storage costs in production.

This page covers trade-offs among search speed, recall, indexing cost, vector storage, quantization, and rescoring for approximate kNN search.

## Tune approximate kNN for speed or accuracy [tune-approximate-knn-for-speed-accuracy]

> To gather results, the kNN API first finds a `num_candidates` number of approximate neighbors per shard, computes similarity to the query vector, selects the top `k` per shard, and merges them into the global top `k` nearest neighbors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To gather results, the kNN API first finds a `num_candidates` number of approximate neighbors per segment, computes similarity to the query vector, selects the top `k` per shard, and merges them into the global top `k` nearest neighbors.
```

For HNSW indices, `num_candidates` is the main search-time speed/accuracy control:

* Increase `num_candidates` to improve recall and accuracy (at the cost of higher latency).

> * Decrease `num_candidates` for faster queries (with a potential accuracy trade-off).

Reviewer 2: Even though it's implied, maybe we could clearly note that `num_candidates` affects the exploration that we do. So the exploration stops once the available documents to explore cannot enter the `num_cands`-sized heap of top results, i.e. when the best available document to explore, is worst than the worst of what we have already collected.
